Jupyterlite integration (#977)
sphinx-gallery/sphinx-gallery: doc/configuration.rst

possible to run an example in your browser. The functionality is quite similar
to Binder in the sense that you will get a Jupyter environment where you can
run the example interactively as a notebook. The main difference with Binder
are:

- with JupyterLite, the example actually runs in your browser, there is no need
  for a separate machine in the cloud to run your Python code. That means that
  starting a Jupyter server is genrally quicker, no need to wait for the Binder
  image to be built
- with JupyterLite the first imports take time. At the time of writing
  (February 2023) ``import scipy`` can take ~15-30s. Some innocuously looking
  Python code may just not work and break in an unexpected fashion. The Jupyter
  kernel is based on Pyodide, see some `here
  <https://pyodide.org/en/latest/usage/wasm-constraints.html>`__ for some
  Pyodide limitations.
- with JupyterLite environments are not as flexible as Binder, for example you
  can not use a docker image but only the default `Pyodide
  <https://pyodide.org/en/stable/index.html>`__ environment. That means that
  some non pure-Python packages may not be available, see list of `available
  packages in Pyodide

>   <https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html>`__.

Reviewer: Maybe you could expand this point a bit and explain that this it's possible to install extra, pure-python packages from pypi.org using the following construct:

```python
try:
    # Manually install extra dependencies when running this example with
    # Pyodide:
    import micropip
    await micropip.install("package_name")
except ImportError:
    # Assume all the dependencies are already installed when running on other
    # types of hosts, such as binder.
    pass
```

Not protecting this snippet against `ImportError` would render the example pyodide-dependent as a result.

Reviewer 2: Note that the `%pip` magic is also supported in the latest JupyterLite releases: https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/latest/howto/python/packages.html#installing-packages-at-runtime

```
%pip install package_name
```

Which could help make remove this `try`/ `except` block which could be awkward to some users.

Reviewer 3: Nice I didn't know this!

===============================================================

Sphinx-Gallery automatically generates Jupyter notebooks for any examples built
with the gallery. `JupyterLite <https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io>`__ makes it
possible to run an example in your browser. The functionality is quite similar
to Binder in the sense that you will get a Jupyter environment where you can
run the example interactively as a notebook. The main difference with Binder
are:

- with JupyterLite, the example actually runs in your browser, there is no need
  for a separate machine in the cloud to run your Python code. That means that
  starting a Jupyter server is genrally quicker, no need to wait for the Binder
  image to be built
- with JupyterLite the first imports take time. At the time of writing
  (February 2023) ``import scipy`` can take ~15-30s. Some innocuously looking
  Python code may just not work and break in an unexpected fashion. The Jupyter
  kernel is based on Pyodide, see some `here
  <https://pyodide.org/en/latest/usage/wasm-constraints.html>`__ for some
  Pyodide limitations.
- with JupyterLite environments are not as flexible as Binder, for example you

>   can not use a docker image but only the default `Pyodide

Reviewer 2: > only the default Pyodide

Maybe there could be a quick mention that it's also be possible to use other kernels, for example Xeus Python: https://github.com/jupyterlite/xeus-python-kernel

Which can be installed with `pip install jupyterlite-xeus-python`.

Reviewer 3: This is a good point. I tried to focus this PR on the simplest case i.e. the Pyolite kernel, but this is certainly something which could be mentioned in a follow-up PR.

Reviewer 2: No problem it could definitely be mentioned later (just noticed while looking at the diff).

Reviewer: Especially with deeper instructions on how to package a kernel with built-in dependencies required to run the examples of a given project.

<https://github.com/sphinx-gallery/sphinx-gallery/blob/master/doc/conf.py>`_
for an example that uses the `public Binder server <https://mybinder.org>`_.

.. _jupyterlite:

Generate JupyterLite links for gallery notebooks (experimental)
===============================================================

Sphinx-Gallery automatically generates Jupyter notebooks for any examples built
with the gallery. `JupyterLite <https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io>`__ makes it

> possible to run an example in your browser. TODO mention difference with Binder?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
possible to run an example in your browser. This is different from Binder links where
the notebook is run on a server. By running in the reader's browser the startup time
can be much lower compared to Binder. However some libraries or parts of some
libraries do not yet work in the browser.
```

How about something like this? Just an idea I had as I was reading the diff (didn't take long to write and maybe you find it useful)

Reviewer 3: Nice thanks a lot! (I thought I tackled all the TODOs left but apparently not :wink:)
